Testing, testing, testing, one, two, three.
Sounds good to me.
This is the 24th of June, and I believe the third tape with General Ted Hopgood.
And we had finished about half or two-thirds of the questions I normally ask.
You went away from this campus to summer camp.
When and where?
Describe it.
Both in the summer of 1962 and the summer of 1964, I went both summers back to Quantico, Virginia, six weeks each time for a Marine Corps summer training and the PLC program, the platoon leaders class program.
Each of the two sessions were one was junior and one more senior PLCs and both of them were indoctrination into the Marine Corps and training heavily on emphasized was discipline and physical fitness.
Now, what led you to pick the Marine Corps?
The Marine Corps was a choice that was influenced primarily by my high school football coach, who was a machine gunner on Iwo Jima.
Plus, I was influenced heavily by the movies that I watched as a boy growing up in Williston, North Dakota.
And I was attracted to the discipline and the esprit of the Marine Corps.
All right, now at that time here, we had Army and Air Force.
We did not yet have the Navy unit, did we?
No, there was Army and Air Force ROTC when I was in the Corps of Cadets, but in the dormitory, Dormitory 1, Spence Hall, where I lived as a freshman, there were several very outstanding upper-class cadets that were in the Marine Corps program, the aforementioned PLC program, and they seemed like the cadets that I aspired to be like, plus my previous statements about my earlier attraction to the Marine Corps.
And at what point did you make that chronologically, what year did you make that choice?
I made that choice on the 28th of November, 1961, which was my freshman year in the Corps because that's when I had my physical and that's when I got my pay entry date bait acceptance into the Marine Corps.
So I had been at school here for just over three months.
What did your buddies think about that decision?
Well, it was pretty well accepted.
I think there was, I don't think, I know there was a certain prestige that was prevalent given to the Marine Corps throughout the country, and that prestige was also prevalent in the Corps of Cadets by the other cadets towards those cadets that were in the program.
About how many in your class?
In my class when we were commissioned there were as I recall in the spring of 65 there were four of us that got commissioned but during the time there were people that were in the program and out of the program for
for grade problems, for physical problems such as bad knees, ankles, and there was those that just lost interest.
There were probably four or five times that number in my class that at one time or another were in the program, but four of us got commissioned.
On your uniform, once you became officially a part of the Marine Corps, what designation was that?
On our uniform, the Corps of Cadets uniform, we were able to wear the Marine Corps emblem, the eagle, globe, and anchor above the left breast pocket.
beginning beginning as soon as you signed up the the anchor was pointing towards the outside the outboard side if you will if you had not been to summer camp and it was it was the anchor was pointed towards the inboard side or towards the center of your chest if you had completed summer camp at that point were you dreaming of being a career officer
Well, it's hard to remember totally, but I was very, very attracted to the Marine Corps, and I had been a good high school athlete, very active in the numbers of sports, and I, at that early stage in my thought process, thought I wanted to either be a Marine officer or be a high school coach, but really, once I was in the Marine Corps, I was very...
strongly sold and attracted to the Marine Corps and really never looked back for the next 30 years.
And you go to summer camp after your fish year?
After my fish year and between my junior and senior years.
Describe being an Aggie at Marine Boot Camp.
Well, I always thought that I had a leg up on all the other
as we were called candidates based on my experience in the Corps of Cadets.
I felt that how to take care of a uniform, how to take orders, how to persevere under stress, to be attentive, how to drill troops, how to march, just the whole idea of discipline and a structured life that I'd picked up in the Corps was, that was what the Marine Corps summer camp was all about.
Were they familiar with people from Texas A&M?
Only in a periphery type.
There was an appreciation for Texas A&M, but I won't say that it was more than other candidates who were from places like the Citadel and VMI.
And were there many of those?
I don't recall.
There might have been total Aggies, Citadel, VMI maybe in 25 or 30 out of say 250 but really the Marine Corps way was that they broke us all down so we were all the same which is shaved heads and confused and
in a high-stress environment, and the main thing in their view, the trainers, if you will, the drill instructors and the officers, was to make us into Marines and forget about everything that had gone up the past.
All right.
Describe, you were there for how many weeks, and what were the primary activities?
We spent six weeks, what we call, at Camp Upshur, which was the first time in 1962, which was junior PLCs.
That was a camp.
located 25 or 30 miles from the center of Quantico and it was Quonset huts left over from World War II.
It was a huge asphalt parade deck on which we marched incessantly and then the hills and the streams and the mosquitoes and the heat and the humidity surrounded the camp and we spent a lot of time out amongst them.
and we spent a lot of time studying Marine Corps history and studying Marine Corps weapons and we went to the rifle range and qualified with our weapons and it was a Reveille was I recall one at five o'clock in the morning and lights out one at 2200 at night and it was an intense
program in very hot classrooms in a very warm, humid Virginia summer.
And then the senior PLCs between 64 and 65 was a little bit more sophisticated in the fact that we were in a large brick barracks on the Potomac River.
But because we were now senior PLCs and had junior PLCs behind us, we were expected to perform at a higher level
and I remember that by that time I had had three years under my belt in the Corps of Cadets and I was more confident in myself and my abilities and had matured somewhat and by that time I was feeling that this Marine Corps thing that I might have a little bit of a skill and a little bit of being able to adapt to the requirements of the Marine Corps.
As far as you could guess,
in hindsight, about what was the fallout, dropout, flunkout rate?
Well, in junior PLCs, I think the dropout rate was about 35%, maybe 40% did not make it.
Senior PLCs, during the camp itself, the dropout rate was maybe 15%.
But once you got past the initial summer camp, the main dropout rate for people not following through on their commissions had to do with their performance as students in college and also those that had
trick knees or bad ankles or those type of things because then as now the Marine Corps requirements for physical standards is is pretty high and in waivers are not giving and I now in retirement with all those years to reflect I think it's a very desirable policy so somebody
built that requirement in the program a long time ago and I found it to work during my over three decades of time as a Marine Corps officer.
Looking back with the blessings of hindsight, in those two summers, what did the Marine Corps at camp do best and what did it at the other extreme, what might it have done better?
Well, I can't think of very much that it could have done better because all of us came in there, we were just like a blank sheet of paper.
And the idea of the Marine Corps of
traditions of the Marine Corps, the idea of teamwork, the idea of patriotism, the idea of service, the idea of instant discipline to orders, the idea of being a good teammate as well as being somebody that could step out and lead were all part and parcel of both summers and were just done in a manner
that was extraordinarily good, but I have to say that in me and in many of the candidates who were there, they had very open, willing recipients of the training and just the Marine Corps mode and way of doing things.
Was there anything done then that by today's standards of political correctness or hazing or anything like that would not be accepted today?
No, I can't.
I never saw any hands being laid on anybody.
heard or observed anything that I didn't think was permissible and I also, the benefit of hindsight, spent three and a half years in my career in Marine Corps recruit training at Parris Island, South Carolina, where 18 months was spent as a battalion commander with 135 drill instructors under my command.
I thought then as a battalion commander and as a candidate going through, what the Marine Corps did and the way they did it was a correct good and the potential payoff was appropriate.
I'm, as you can gather, very, very strong on the ethos and the way that the Marine Corps does things.
It was a wonderful organization that I would join again just as quick, if not quicker than I did the first time and had a wonderful, fulfilling life and career and friendships and opportunities and chance to serve the nation that I just feel tremendously blessed.
Now, from either of those summers, when you came back, you must have felt extra pride being here at A&M and being a part of the Marine Corps.
Well, I think it all blended together.
I'm one of these guys that I love the Corps of Cadets almost from the instant I got here in the Marine Corps.
I was kind of, I guess, unique in the fact that I really enjoyed wearing a uniform and I enjoyed the disciplined lifestyle.
And I just remember my time in the Corps of Cadets as just being a great time.
For example, when you referred then or now to the word Corps,
Did you ever have any confusion from the listener?
Well, not really.
I knew that the... I always talked about the Aggie Corps.
Okay.
And I always talked about the Marine Corps.
And I wasn't a person in my speech that I hardly ever used the term the Corps unless I was just absolutely, totally...
immersed and sure of the group that I was talking to.
When you were here as a student, did future Marines have any kind of a club?
Well, we future Marines, we all knew who we were and who the other potential future Marines were because when the officer, selection officer, who had his offices in Houston would come to campus,
he would have meetings in the evening for all the people that were in the program.
And he would also, if people that were thinking about in the program, they would be invited and we would be invited to encourage them and explain our own beliefs on the Marine Corps.
And then during my sophomore year in the Corps, we had a company called I-3
which was a company that the upperclassmen were people that had it primarily that had an interest in the Marine Corps and the freshmen were freshmen that were going to part of the new Texas Maritime Academy.
They did their freshman year, as I recall, on campus here in College Station and then their succeeding years were done on the campus in Galveston.
And that company lasted until late November or early December of my junior year, which was 1963.
It must have been December.
when we were disbanded because of an incident where we got involved with another outfit and another dormitory and this decision was made that we would be disbanded.
While you were a student, did you have any, as you look back now, do you realize you had some role models here on campus?
Yes, the role models on campus, I remember one in particular was Tom Ralph.
Tom Ralph was a senior when I was a freshman.
That's R-A-L-F-F?
R-A-L-P-H, Thomas H. Ralph, Jr., R-A-L-P-H.
He was...
from Clifton, Texas, and he lived in our dormitory and he was highly respected by certainly everyone.
He was a Yale leader.
He was a Ross volunteer.
He had won some notoriety during this
summer leading up to his senior year at Quantico in the summer camp, and he was, I thought he was a terrific cadet and a very, very strong role model.
Unfortunately, he was killed in Vietnam.
And I later on in my life and my career, I met an officer who was there the day that he was killed in Vietnam.
And I also met another officer who retired as a Marine Corps four star who told me that that Lieutenant Ralph, first Lieutenant Ralph, who he served with was was the best Marine that he ever knew.
So I guess my and the opinion of others that we had of Tom Ralph as a
potential Marine were later borne out by his service in the Marine Corps.
Were there, as you look back now, were there some Corps advisors, commanders, A&M administrators that made a strong impression on you?
Well, there was, of course, we were all under the leadership of President Rutter.
What did you all think of him?
Well, General Rutter was impressive from any way that you wanted to see him.
He was, I think, his determination, his leadership, his energy were well known to all of us.
He was seen by us cadets as a...
a no-nonsense leader who didn't tolerate the stupid pranks and but at the same time somebody who was knowledgeable enough of a leader to know that that while we weren't going to be perfect we could strive for perfection without being perfect
And in many ways, he was, I guess, he had his gruff side, but he also had his warm side.
You felt like he was the captain of the team as opposed to being a dictator.
A very strong captain, I might add, but just a wonderful individual.
Did you or any of your buddies ever attempt any pranks relating to
as he sometimes called himself, Prexy Rudder?
No, I don't.
I'll tell you, either I was, I might have been fearful enough of a retribution or respect, but I don't recall ever
Ever wanting to pull a prank on the president.
He was above and beyond our thoughts for pranks.
All right, other potential role models.
Commandant, any Corps advisors?
I remember there was a major on the staff, an Army major named Bolte, B-O-L-T-E, who I remember very fondly as he was an advisor to what we had.
We had a little club called the Semper Fidelis Club,
for people that were pursuing Marine Corps contracts and he was our advisor and he was a serious, tall, good-looking, impressive individual who
who knew our names and had time for us and usually with any interaction you have there was some type of mesh message or instruction that all that was given that always seemed to be on the mark your major was what I majored in physical education and I also had a
a double major, if you will, in English, although it's not on my degree.
I took numerous English courses because I enjoyed reading, writing and speaking and wanted to attempt to be able to have some degree of proficiency beyond that normally expected.
If you had all of your teachers and academic advisors here today, to which ones of them would you want to express appreciation?
Well, I would remember C.K.
Esten for sure and the fact that he taught us speech and he was a wonderful
Terrifically, no-nonsense classroom instructor who was very knowledgeable and just, I just found him fascinating.
There was a Dr. Ashcraft that taught history.
Alan Ashcraft.
Who was absolutely terrific and made it come alive and I had a sense of humor that made his instruction wonderful and despised.
long hours and as a cadet I never ever recall having anything other than fascination in his in his classes especially the Civil War portions and there were I can't remember names beyond that but the instruction I received at A&M and later I compared it to instruction I received at other colleges and
Throughout the Marine Corps, the instructors at A&M were just top notch.
To whom did you turn for academic advice?
Well, the head of the physical education department was Dr. Carl W. Landis.
And Dr. Landis made sure that our degree plans were lined up and ready to go.
And really I was, as I recall, an A and B student certainly in those courses.
And I joined the classroom.
I was never an academic problem.
With his guidance laid out the courses that I had to take and, you know, did them every semester.
But I do remember him as always having time for students and being a warm and cordial, all the dealings I had with them.
Off campus, you and your buddies, how often did you go downtown Bryan or to Northgate?
Did you have wheels?
Starting my junior year, I had my own car.
But I was a...
I was a stay-on-campus guy.
As I mentioned before, I loved the Corps and whatever my role was in the Corps, sophomore, junior, senior, freshman, I pursued it to the hilt and about junior year, maybe sophomore year, I became familiar with the
with the girls dormitories over in Austin and would drive over there singly or with buddies periodically for dates but my social life was not extravagant and I was a non-drinker then and continued it throughout my life so I guess I was safe on the roads and a pretty sober
as I like to remember, not only when I'm talking to my kids, but pretty much a straight arrow guy and I didn't want to do anything to jeopardize getting commissioned when I graduated in May of 65.
Were there any, even by reputation, were there any wild night spots in Brian Concerning?
I don't recall.
I really don't.
There was some of the upperclassmen in my freshman and sophomore years would come back to the dorms drunk at night and cause a little bit of a ruckus, but
I remember it now and maybe hindsight makes everything brighter but I remember it as being more funny and humorous as opposed to unsettling or bothersome and by my junior and senior year maybe my classmates knew that I was kind of a serious straight arrow type guy and my friendships and acquaintances were more of the
straight arrow, let's study, let's do the core thing than the other side.
As far as you know, what beverages were they drinking?
I don't know.
All I remember is various, sometimes outfit parties there would be beer.
I don't remember beyond beer, but
Since I wasn't into what they were drinking, I really didn't pay much attention.
And smoking?
I remember that smoking, I was never a smoker.
Some people smoked, but... Were you and your buddies even aware that marijuana or heroin existed?
No, marijuana and heroin were unknown to us as Aggies, and my first exposure to marijuana
was a little bit in 1966 in Vietnam, but by 1968, 69, there was pretty prevalent usage in the armed forces to include the Marine Corps among the younger enlisted.
How often did you go home on the weekends?
The home for me was at Williston, North Dakota, so, and then later in my,
Junior year, my parents moved to Billings, Montana, so I went home at Christmas time, was the only time I went home.
What did you do Thanksgiving and Easter break?
Thanksgiving and Easter... Stayed here?
Well, no, I either went up to Palestine,
where my mother's side of the family lived, or I went with buddies from the Corps, went to their homes, or a few trips, or went with homes to friends from the University of Texas.
Now, it's during your time, isn't it, that Saturday classes ended?
Best I can recall is that there were no classroom Saturdays, but we had drill on Saturday mornings.
We had military drill with, I remember specifically as a freshman and sophomore, with rifles on Saturday mornings.
Maybe even junior or senior year, it's just not that clear in my mind.
I have a guess of what your answer is going to be to this one.
What national or international events do you remember that you recall where you were when you heard the news?
Well, I remember November of 1963 when John F. Kennedy, President Kennedy, was assassinated in Dallas.
I remember we were working on bonfire.
We were out at a cut site.
I remember that that news is being very very very significant the I was a junior yell leader that year I remember being at the meetings with the other primarily the seniors and the senior yell leaders when the decision was made to cancel bonfire in the fall of 1963 I also remember the death of
General Douglas MacArthur was, I believe, in the spring of 1962, but I'm not totally sure on that.
I remember reading about it and hearing it on the radio and being concerned about it.
And events other than that, I certainly remember in March of 1965 when the Marine Corps in the United States first put ground forces into Vietnam, I remember that.
because by that time, March of 65, my graduation in May of 65 appeared to be a certainty, and I knew that the possibility of my being involved in that war were quite likely.
Let's jump back to the Kennedy.
Where were you the moment you heard the report of the assassination?
How did you learn that?
Well, as I mentioned, we were working on a bonfire.
We were out at a cut site.
As I recall, it was west of, on the way to Hearn, west of College Station.
We were out on a, it was a beautiful fall afternoon, and I believe that we might have had the, a car radio turned up loud enough as we were, um,
as we were out there at the cut site, and once we heard it, as I recall, we quickly finished up what we were doing and headed back to campus.
All right, now, I haven't gotten this from many people, so this will be a key part.
Describe bonfire work during your years.
About when did it start, and what did you and your buddies do?
What work did you do?
Bonfire in my student days, as best I can recall.
The bonfire, I know it was built behind Duncan Dining Hall and Duncan Field.
I remember it was a teepee style.
I remember the center pole.
I remember almost every year a lot of rain and mud.
I remember that my freshman year, I remember working out in the cut site
And I remember that the activity was well-structured and well-led by the upperclassmen.
I remember it being difficult work.
In terms of calendar, about when did it begin?
Best I can recall was that the most...
At the most, it was three weekends before the site.
It was two or three weeks of work.
It was intense work, but it was outdoors.
It was vigorous.
Do you remember injuries?
The only injuries that I recall were twisted knees and ankles and...
didn't see or didn't know of anybody that that that got hit with an axe or a machete and I can't determine whether that really happened or whether that was just part of the lectures and stories we heard to ensure that we were that we were safe when we were out doing what we were doing and